title: Moral Consistency
created: 2026-05-25
END_METADATA

IN PROGRESS

As I was reading the Book of Exodus for the first time I came accross the story of Pharoh and his chariots chasing down the Israelites ttempting to prevent their ultimate escape. [SET UP CONTEXT]

[COMPARE WITH EXODUS 34 qualities of God]

When we encounter someone and observe them act in the world we might [HANDLE] their actions, morally, in a hundred ways. We may seek to justify, empathize with, recoil from, explain, deflect or even deny their actions as right or wrong. But we always reduce the action, boil it down, to being right or wrong or not applicable. It's not that every action _must_ have a moral outcome, just that every action exists in a moral space. We should, or feel we should, be able to traverse the moral landscape. When some does or says or thinks something, there must be a path that allowed that person to travel from a moral principle to that action.

Simultaneously, it feels as though some moralities will never meet. There is an ocean in between. There is a mountain in the middle. There is a grand pit the splits one sense of justice from another. There are some actions that simply would never live in the moral space that the actor inhabits. But in all these cases, on a clear day, or after much exploration, we should still be able to trace the outlines of a moral principle and then either _know_ it cannot be traveresed or find that it's possible, however hidden and winding the paths are.

Morality is at least as complicated as our landscapes, and probably infinitely more so. All that being said, if I see or hear someone do something morally inconsistent, and I want to understand what allowed them to traverse that gap, I only have three roads of understanding. Their actions were either morally inconsistent, morally consistent, or not applicable to morality altogether. 

[ANECDOTE OF PROTECTING LOVED ONES FROM VIOLENT INTRUDER]

So, back to the description of YHWH in Exodus 34. If we understand YHWH as God who is "merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness, keeping steadfast love for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin", how can He, morally, "[visit] the iniquity of the fathers upon the children and the children’s children, to the third and the fourth generation?" Well, life is complicated, there are many, many treacherous paths from a moral principle to a moral action. How could God be faithful to his people  _and_ slow to anger toward His people's enemies who mean them harm? If He is too slow to anger at the enemy's evil, He would not, perhaps, fulfill His faithfulness to His people. In that case, there must be a priority or higher good employed to resolve the moral conflict. Let's say he chooses to preserve his people in a moment of peril, by swallowing up the enemy in a flood. So, in a sense it's not really morally inconsistent. God choose to preserve the life of ones He is faithful to and, in that moment, the enemies would have either needed to stand down, or be cast into the sea. Since they did not stand down, God cast them away forever.

For me, the problem with this is that, unlike us, God is omnipotent. This is a situation that only exists because He allowed it to exsit. Could He not have just had Moses raise the water cross-ways behind the Israelites, keepign Pharoh's army back physically? Must they have been utterly destroyed? Could God have not presever both the life of his faithful _and_ their enemies? Perhaps it opens up to future pathways to nastiness. Perhaps it was the only way to ensure Pharoh never went after the Israelites again. But God can changes hearts and minds too, Why not do that? We could ask these questions forever and the problem of evil isn't realyl what I'm trying to explore at the moment.

I am search for the moral landscapes that God inhabits. I'm looking for something more concrete or findamentsl than perhaps exists. I'm struglling to recognize the moral landscape that I, myself, inhabit. Why do so many of YHWH's actions feel antitheitical to the values we hold today as individuals, as Christians, as Westernerns, or as people exxisting in the great confluence of our time?

I have this sense that preserving life is one of the most important moral principles we have. That all life is worth preserving. And then after that, being equally important, is securing and offering to that life, the tools to pursue a good life. You know something along the lines of:

        "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness."

Though I can't shake the feeling that we got this one right, I can't help but wonder if it simply does not line up with the God of the Old Testament. In the most fundamental way, Life does seem to be of supreme importance to YHWH. He created it after all. None of this is possible with Him. But among the nitty gritty everyday realitiees of the ancient Israelites, there are so many instances where the life of the individual does not seem to be important at all. I speak in such extremes because there seem to be an infinite nubmer of divine, miraculous options at hand that are not employed. But maybe that's the difference. God is looking at preserving Life [eternal] and I am thinking of every individual life as the most important life.

